The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Deeds Carillon and Carillon Park, by
Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Deeds Carillon and Carillon Park

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: April 26, 2021 [eBook #65167]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Stephen Hutcheson and the Online Distributed Proofreading
             Team at https://www.pgdp.net

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DEEDS CARILLON AND CARILLON
PARK ***




                           The DEEDS CARILLON
                                  and
                             Carillon Park


    [Illustration: Throughout her life, Mrs. Edward A. Deeds was a lover
    of music. By the time she had reached her early teens she was an
    accomplished musician. From then until her passing in 1949, music
    remained one of the dominant interests of her life. Her desire to
    share the beauty of good music with others found expression in many
    ways and culminated in her decision to erect a Carillon which for
    generations to come would be a source of enjoyment and relaxation
    for the people of this community. She saw this dream fulfilled when
    on Easter Sunday in April, 1942, the Deeds Carillon bells rang out
    in a program of Easter music. The beautiful shaft with its
    thirty-two bells became a striking symbol of the interest of Mrs.
    Deeds in music and in the community of which she was so long a
    part.]

    [Illustration: Deeds Carillon]




                           The Deeds Carillon


Carillon Park owes its existence to the generosity of two
public-spirited Dayton citizens, Colonel and Mrs. Edward A. Deeds. It is
an expression of the interests of two people expanded for the pleasure
and advancement of the entire community.

The Park had its inception with the Carillon, the gift of Mrs. Deeds.
Devoted to music from her girlhood, and herself an accomplished
musician, she had the inspiration for it while listening to the chimes
in one of the famous old belfries of Bruges. As the melodious notes fell
on her ears she said to herself, “In no other way can simple and
inspiring music be spread among the entire populace.” In that hour was
born the idea of the Deeds Carillon which rears its majestic height in
the midst of Carillon Park.

The idea of combining a group of bells to form a carillon dates back to
the Middle Ages. Since bells provided the world’s oldest and most simple
form of musical expression there came the evolution from a call to
prayer to a musical program. Some of Europe’s most famed and beautiful
towers have carillons. The carillon was developed to a greater and more
artistic extent in Belgium than in any other continental country, not
only in Bruges but also in Antwerp, Ghent, and Mechlin. Around the
carillon bells has been woven a tradition of beauty and inspirational
service.

    [Illustration: Mrs. Edward A. Deeds and Colonel Deeds at the first
    regularly scheduled carillon program August 23, 1942.]

Before embarking on her enterprise Mrs. Deeds viewed many carillons at
home and abroad and made a careful study of bells. The initial
requirement was to find a site which would provide the best ultimate
results from carillon music without echo and the jumbling of tone. Early
in her planning Mrs. Deeds considered Deeds Park at the junction of the
Miami River and Mad River. This park—a gift of Colonel Deeds to the city
of Dayton—would have made an appropriate setting. The idea was
reluctantly abandoned because of interfering noises and sound deflection
which would occur in the area. Finally Mrs. Deeds decided upon a site in
the triangular area located between Patterson Boulevard and Carillon
Boulevard almost adjacent to Old River, The National Cash Register
Company recreational park.

    [Illustration: The beautiful bronze door at the Carillon is more
    than an entranceway. In the cherished words of Longfellow’s
    “Christmas Bells” it expresses the spirit in which the Carillon was
    conceived and dedicated to the service of the people ... “With Peace
    on Earth, good will to men.”]




  IT WAS AS IF AN EARTHQUAKE RENT
  THE HEARTHSTONES OF A CONTINENT
  AND MADE FORLORN
  THE HOUSEHOLDS BORN
  OF PEACE ON EARTH GOOD WILL TO MEN

  AND IN DESPAIR I BOWED MY HEAD
  THERE IS NO PEACE ON EARTH I SAID
  FOR HATE IS STRONG
  AND MOCKS THE SONG
  OF PEACE ON EARTH GOOD WILL TO MEN

  THEN PEALED THE BELLS MORE LOUD AND DEEP
  GOD IS NOT DEAD NOR DOES HE SLEEP
  THE WRONG SHALL FAIL
  THE RIGHT PREVAIL
  WITH PEACE ON EARTH GOOD WILL TO MEN

                                                              LONGFELLOW

The sixty-one acres comprised in Carillon Park represent a notable piece
of reclamation. For many years it was periodically flooded and became a
bushy swamp breeding mosquitoes and germs. It was one of Dayton’s
eyesores in addition to being a menace to health. The decision to build
the Deeds Carillon led to its transformation. Within a year the one-time
“dismal swamp” emerged as an ideal pleasure ground equipped with a
parking space for hundreds of motor cars. In this lovely, wooded, and
verdant environment the citizens of Dayton and all others who come,
relax and enjoy the music of the carillon bells.

Including both large and small examples, there were only six true
carillon towers in the United States prior to the construction of the
Deeds Carillon. Of these, two were on college grounds, two on private
estates, one in a cemetery, while the sixth was the one built by the
late Edward K. Bok on his Florida estate. A true carillon must have a
minimum of twenty-three bells providing the tones and semitones to
encompass the full octaves. Except in rare instances when they were hung
in the gabled arches of the old Spanish missions and outside oriental
temples, carillon bells are seldom seen. For hundreds of years
architects have struggled with the problem of providing structures to
support carillons which will elevate them to a height at which they can
be adequately heard over the surrounding countryside. The solution had
invariably been to erect an enclosed tower in which the bells are hidden
from view and covered with grilles which screen the bells from sight and
tend to muffle the sound.

    [Illustration: The casting of carillon bells is an art handed down
    from father to son. The Meneely Company which cast the Deeds
    Carillon bells practiced the art for six generations. Once a bell is
    cast, no alterations can be made in it. If a true tone is not
    achieved the work must be done over.]

    [Illustration: The largest bell in the chandelier of 32 bells in the
    Deeds Carillon weighs 7,000 pounds, and the smallest 250 pounds.
    They are cast in bronze and the total weight of all the bells and
    the chandelier is 32 tons.]

    [Illustration: Hours of planning and consultation with architects
    and the bell casters went into the building of the Deeds Carillon.]

Starting with the instruction from Mrs. Deeds that the thirty-two bells
in the Deeds Carillon must all be exposed to view, the architects, after
long study and investigation, were able to carry out her wishes. The
Deeds Carillon is the first tower to have all the bells mounted entirely
in the open, thus insuring greater carrying power and purest,
unrestricted beauty of tone. Such a departure from the old method of
construction required a complete rechecking of the science of carillon
tower design and bell placement.

Like Colonel Deeds, Mrs. Deeds was a perfectionist. She visioned the
ideal structure, and the architects, Reinhard, Hofmeister & Walquist of
New York, designers of Rockefeller Center, met every requirement. The
landscaping surrounding the tower was in the hands of Olmstead Brothers
of Boston, foremost in their field.

An unusual feature of the design is the so-called entasis of the sides
of the tower in which they were reduced toward the top as much as
eighteen inches, not in a straight line but by means of a curve which
bows three inches from top to bottom. The purpose of this is not to make
the sides bulge but to correct the optical illusion of pinching in and
actually making the sides look straight. This was the device employed by
the ancient Greeks for the same purpose in the design of their classic
columns.

    [Illustration: The stone shafts of the Carillon are built around a
    steel core.]

    [Illustration: A mass of scaffolding was a requisite in building the
    Carillon.]

    [Illustration: Moving the bells from the freight cars which brought
    them to Dayton and hanging them in position were operations which
    called for great skill.]

    [Illustration: The impressive array of the 32 bells in the Carillon
    arranged at its base just previous to being placed in position.]

The Carillon tower, built of granite, steel, and limestone, soars
skyward 151 feet from the base planted on a green and friendly hill. It
is a shaft of precise beauty, dramatic in its simplicity, and
terminating in noble arches. Suspended from the cross-shaped
intersections of the arches, in full sight from all directions and
visible for miles around, is the chandelier of bells. At the base of the
Carillon is the Console Room. From here an elaborate electrical system
plays the bells through the touch of the operator’s fingers at the
console.

The actual ringing of the bells requires an unusual mechanism consisting
of an electrical solenoid, delivering a blow of proper force for each
size of bell. Suitable screens, designed so as not to interfere with the
sound, are placed at the bottom of the mechanism so that each bell, when
viewed from the ground, presents a uniform appearance, only the clapper
being visible. This was the first time that such a type of construction
in all its details had been followed, making possible a full, rich
beauty of tone.

    [Illustration: The console which controls the playing of the
    Carillon is located in a special room within the structure.]

In kinship with the spiritual fervor and idealism built into the
Carillon is the impressive bronze door bearing these inspirational words
by Longfellow:

  It was as if an earthquake rent
  The hearthstones of a continent,
  And made forlorn the households born
  Of peace on earth good will to men.

  And in despair I bowed my head
  There is no peace on earth I said
  For hate is strong and mocks the song
  Of peace on earth good will to men.

  Then pealed the bells more loud and deep
  God is not dead nor does He sleep,
  The wrong shall fail, the right prevail
  With peace on earth good will to men.

The bells range in size from six feet in diameter with a weight of 7,000
pounds to the smallest one which is eighteen inches in diameter weighing
250 pounds. Of the thirty-two bells in the Carillon, twenty-three are
speaking bells covering a range of two full octaves from B flat below
middle C. On the speaking bells were inscribed the names of the Deeds
family then living, while on the silent bells appear the names of six
deceased members.

    [Illustration: The Celestron was added several years after the
    Carillon was built. This is an amplifying system incorporating a
    number of advanced features and making it possible to play recorded
    music so that it can be heard over a wide area. The Celestron has no
    connection with the Carillon bells. Since the addition of the
    Celestron, most programs are divided between carillon music and
    recorded music.]

    [Illustration: This scene in the Carillon parking area has been
    duplicated many times, as Sunday afternoon programs and others have
    been presented.]

    [Illustration: Easter Dawn Services at the Carillon.]

The same loving care that was lavished on the planning of the Carillon
has found expression in the arrangement of the programs. Mrs. Deeds
personally supervised the selection and arrangement of more than 400
musical selections so they could be played on the bells. The music has
been transferred to sheets of white Bristol paper bearing the Carillon
crest which are filed systematically for reference.

Thirty-five feet above the base of the Carillon tower is a balcony-like
structure in bronze which contains a room twelve feet in diameter and
six feet high. In this room are installed thirty-two powerful
high-fidelity speakers of the most advanced design. On Easter morning,
Christmas Eve, and other occasions, programs are broadcast directly to
the countryside. Recorded music, performed by the world’s finest bands,
choruses, orchestras and soloists, is to be heard with all its beauty
for nearly a mile in every direction throughout the wide-open spaces
about the Carillon tower. This Celestron is not connected in any way
with the chandelier of bells of the Carillon. It is an additional
instrument for the pleasure of those who love good music.

The science of bell-making is an old one. Sometimes it is necessary to
cast twenty or thirty bells to fill an order for a ten-bell chime. The
Deeds Carillon bells were made by The Meneely Bell Company of Troy, New
York.




Typical Sunday Afternoon Carillon Park Program

                                CARILLON
  1. America
  2. Song of Faith
  3. Rock of Ages
  4. The Holy City
  5. In the Garden
  6. When They Ring the Golden Bells
  7. Goin’ Home
  8. Great God of Nations
  9. In a Monastery Garden
  10. The Bells of London
  11. The Bells of St. Mary’s
  12. Ah! Sweet Mystery of Life
  13. Pilgrim’s Chorus
  14. Land of Hope and Glory
  15. Jesu, Joy of Man’s Desiring
  16. Rhapsody for Bells
                               CELESTRON
  1. Glorious Things of Thee Are Spoken (Haydn)
        World Choristers
  2. Spanish Caprice (Rimsky-Korsakoff)
        Cincinnati Summer Opera Orchestra
  3. Come Where My Love Lies Dreaming (Foster)
        Jesse Crawford, Organist
  4. Fight On (Sweet and Grant)
        Frank Westerfield Band
  5. The Hills of Home (Fox)
        Nelson Eddy, Baritone
  6. King Cotton March (Sousa)
        Frank Westerfield Band
  7. I’m Falling in Love With Someone (Herbert)
        Jane Marcy and Roland Smythe
  8. Flapperette (Greer)
        Wilson Ames, Organist
  9. Just A-Wearyin’ for You (Bond)
        Walter Preston, Baritone
  10. Waltzing Doll (Poldini)
        Daniel Lieberfeld Orchestra
  11. The Star-Spangled Banner


CELESTRON

  An especially designed amplifying installation for the playing of
          recorded music.
  32 high-fidelity speakers. Uniform frequency range from 50 to 15,000
          cycles.
  Total operating power—5,500 watts.
  Bronze Galeria 12 ft. in width; located 35 ft. above terrace.
  Record player in Console Room.
  Control panels in Power Room.

    [Illustration: The sectional diagram at the left shows the
    construction and arrangement of the Carillon both above and below
    ground. The map shows location and parking area.]




  Number of bells                                                       32
  Total weight of bell chandelier                                  32 tons
  Diameter smallest bell                                       1 ft. 6 in.
  Diameter largest bell                                              6 ft.
  Height of tower above terrace                              151 ft. 6 in.
  Height of tower from bottom of                             183 ft. 7 in.
  foundation
  Construction:
  Indiana Limestone with Granite Base.
  1 _Chandelier of bells_
  2 _Galeria for Celestron_
  3 _Carillon Console Room and Celestron
  Record Player_
  4 _Power Room_
  5 _Basement_

A most spectacular step in bell-making comes when the copper and tin are
melted and mixed in the oil furnace, brought to just the proper
temperature, and then carried in a huge ladle from which the molten
alloy is poured into the mold.

Larger bells are kept buried in dirt for days after the casting to
retard their cooling. Sometimes weeks go by before the bell can be
“shaken out” and the founder gets the final check on the accuracy of his
calculations.

The Meneely Bell Company foundry represented a curious mixture of the
old and the new. There was the main foundry with its large modern oil
melting furnaces in which was blended the age-old mixture of copper and
tin which is known in the textbooks as “bell metal”.... Out in the next
shop were the blacksmith and his helper, skillfully working iron into
the special bell mountings. Immediately behind this was the finishing
room where large and small bells were cleaned and buffed, while finished
ones were being set into their mountings for final tests before
shipment. Upstairs, patterns and cabinets were fashioned from wood;
while on a nearby drafting board a chime would take form as it would fit
into its final position in the tower.

In making bells, there must be a complete understanding of the technical
elements that make a bell ring true. Meneely’s men knew that a pure tone
was a definite number of vibrations per second as sensed by the human
ear.

The sound of a single tone is pleasant but colorless. The usual tone is
made up of a number of different pure tones, blending together, with the
dominant one giving the tone its pitch. Practically everything that will
vibrate will produce a tone, but only certain combinations will have the
musical qualities which distinguish them from unpleasant “noise.”

In this country, the commonest form of chime is that found in clock
towers. Principally used to strike the quarters and hours, these bells
are usually stationary and seldom number more than four or five; hence
no complete airs can be played with them.

    [Illustration: From an acoustical standpoint the Deeds Carillon is
    ideally located. The hills to the south provide a natural sounding
    board and enhance the tone of the music.]

Chimes usually contain a minimum of ten bells, which give enough tones
in the diatonic scale to permit the rendering of hundreds of complete
hymns, folk songs, etc., in simple harmonies. Chimes are typically an
American form of art and are found in our churches in every part of the
country. The bells do not move, but the clappers are operated from
manual claviers, or by modern electrical methods employing small
piano-like keyboards.

    [Illustration: This picture shows how the bells are mounted on the
    chandelier and hang suspended from the top of the Carillon. The
    larger bells are at the top of the chandelier.]

    [Illustration: The regular Sunday afternoon concerts at Carillon
    Park have drawn music lovers in ever-increasing numbers. In the
    informal atmosphere of a beautiful park on a sunny summer afternoon,
    there is pleasure and relaxation for all the family. The hour-long
    program is now divided between numbers played on the bells and
    recorded music amplified through the Celestron.]

    [Illustration: People in Carillon Park]

    [Illustration: People in Carillon Park]

The first regularly scheduled Deeds Carillon program was presented on
Sunday, August 23, 1942, in the presence of a capacity crowd. The first
two programs were played by Mrs. Deeds. Since that inaugural day,
programs are given every Sunday afternoon, June through October, and at
Easter Sunrise.

Once Carillon Park had been created, Colonel Deeds stepped into the
picture for his contribution to the project. His wise counsel and sense
of perfection had contributed much to the success of the tower
construction. He now set about to gratify his love for the historic with
the larger conception of providing a group of exhibits that would be a
visual lesson in history. The striking parade of transportation in the
Park dating from the picturesque days of the Conestoga wagon and the
Concord coach to the Wright airplane is the result. Every exhibit meant
painstaking research and discriminating choice.

The Deeds Carillon stands on a three-acre tract purchased by Mrs. Deeds
from NCR. The property was, in turn deeded to Educational and Musical
Arts, Incorporated. This is an administrative subsidiary of the Dayton
Foundation, especially created to carry out the construction and
perpetuation plans through a group of Dayton’s civic leaders who were
proud and glad to assume the responsibility. The financial requirements
for maintenance and operation are met through an endowment fund created
by Mrs. Deeds and contributions of Colonel Deeds.

Carillon Park is unique among the gifts for public enjoyment in that it
serves a threefold purpose. The Carillon itself, with its eloquent and
deep-toned bells, is a spiritual stimulant for Dayton, a source of
beauty and inspiration. The Park, a natural beauty spot, is a sanctuary
for all people, while the historical exhibits are highly educational.

    [Illustration: People in Carillon Park]

    [Illustration: People in Carillon Park]




                The Historical Exhibits at Carillon Park


In a desire to perpetuate some of those links with the past which are
rapidly passing from the scene, an historical exhibit has been set up in
Carillon Park. The caretaker’s house has been built as a replica of an
old grist mill and includes a water wheel which turns a millstone, just
as in the mills of yesterday.

Most of the other exhibits are concerned with transportation and tell
the story of man’s progress from the days of the Conestoga wagon, the
Concord coach and the canal, to the airplane. They also include a
covered bridge which long served the people of this valley and a
grasshopper locomotive, the oldest in existence.

    [Illustration: The Concord Coach]

    [Illustration: The Steam Fire Engine]

    [Illustration: The Old Covered Bridge]

    [Illustration: Original Canal Lock]

    [Illustration: The Old Grist Mill]

    [Illustration: The Conestoga Wagon]

    [Illustration: The restored 1905 Wright airplane]

    [Illustration: The Grasshopper Locomotive]

    [Illustration: The Pioneer Home]

    [Illustration: Deeds Barn]

    [Illustration: The Deeds Carillon is no less impressive by night
    than by day. Softly lighted, it reaches skyward, symbolic in its
    strength and simplicity of the spirit of the people to whom it is
    dedicated.]


                             CARILLON PARK
                              DAYTON, OHIO

               One of a series of Carillon Park booklets.
                            Price ten cents.

                           PRINTED IN U.S.A.




                          Transcriber’s Notes


—Silently corrected a few typos.

—Retained publication information from the printed edition: this eBook
  is public-domain in the country of publication.

—In the text versions only, text in italics is delimited by
  _underscores_.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DEEDS CARILLON AND CARILLON
PARK ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
